                CIMA

 Management Case Study

     May & August 2026




          Mock Exam B
           Answers


To gain maximum benefit, do not refer to these answers
until you have completed the mock questions and
submitted them for marking.
CIMA MANAGE MENT LEVEL CASE ST UDY (MAY AND AUGUST 2026 )




© Kaplan Financial Limited, 2026
The text in this material and any others made available by any Kaplan Group company does
not amount to advice on a particular matter and should not be taken as such. No reliance
should be placed on the content as the basis for any investment or other decision or in
connection with any advice given to third parties. Please consult your appropriate professional
adviser as necessary. Kaplan Publishing Limited and all other Kaplan group companies
expressly disclaim all liability to any person in respect of any losses or other claims, whether
direct, indirect, incidental, consequential or otherwise arising in relation to the use of such
materials.
All rights reserved. No part of this examination may be reproduced or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any
information storage and retrieval system, without prior permission from Kaplan Publishing.




2                                                                       K A P LA N P UB L I S H I N G
                                                                  MO CK E XAM B - ANSWERS

Task 1

To: Elizabeth Maenda
From: Financial Manager
Date: Today
Subject: Moving into the market for trays

Challenges in predicting costs and revenues

Market size and market share

The first challenge is that we will be entering into a market that we do not have experience
of. We will need to gather data on the market size for trays in order to understand our
potential sales volumes and therefore potential sales revenues.

We know that the overall food packaging market in Harrland is growing, but we need to
determine the current level for sales of trays and its growth potential, so forecasts for the
specific market segment will need to be obtained.

The second challenge for predicting volumes is to determine what our market share may be.
For this, we will need to know who currently provides trays to the Harrland market and
whether we will be directly competing with them. We will need to know and understand what
our strengths and weaknesses are, so that we can determine how well we can target taking
market share from those competitors.

We are an established brand name for cartons and tubs. This may transfer well to the sale of
trays, but that is not guaranteed, so we may need to promote the Cartn brand significantly to
gain our desired market share, incurring additional cost.

Our desire to enter the market is driven by Pack-Up, so a good place to start would be to
investigate the quality and prices of their trays. It could be that innovation has driven their
recent success in tray sales and profitability. Entering the market with a generic tray product
may not capture the same level of growth.

Pricing

We will need to understand where our products will be positioned in the market so that we
can form a pricing strategy. With lots of competition, we need to either differentiate by
producing an innovative and/or high-quality product, allowing us to charge a high price, or we
need to compete on price for the same standard of product already supplied to the market.
Until this decision is made, we will not be able to predict sales revenues.

Costs

We need to determine the specification of materials that would be needed for tray
manufacture. If Pack-Up’s recent growth has been driven by innovation, we may need to incur
a significant amount of expenditure to try to replicate that. If their growth has been driven by



K APLAN P UBLI S H I N G                                                                      3
CIMA MANAGE MENT LEVEL CASE ST UDY (MAY AND AUGUST 2026 )

promotional activity, they may now have a tight hold on the Harrland market, and we would
require a significant budget for promotional activities to gain market share.

We will also need to determine how to produce trays. Can any of our current production lines
be adapted for this, or will we need to invest in new plant and equipment?

Increased production levels will lead to an increase in factory operating costs, such as
electricity use, which should be factored into the appraisal.

To successfully enter the market for trays, we will need to source appropriate materials,
especially if our only route to success is via innovation. We may wish to use the same supplier
as Pack-Up. However, this may not be possible if they have a trading relationship that prevents
them from selling to competitors.

Materials costs may be high on a per unit basis while sales are low for a new product. We
would have to predict how economies of scale would arise and factor this into our calculations.

Recruitment and training may be needed for staff who will produce the trays. The level of
expenditure will depend on the scale at which we plan to undertake the project.

Decisions must be made about the scale of the project to be evaluated via NPV calculation.
The project is to start on a small scale and potentially grow later. For the NPV, we need to
know a timeframe over which to perform the calculations. Do we produce cash flows for the
initial small phase of the project, or do we include estimates of the later growth phase?

Usefulness of competitor’s segmental report

The fact that Pack-Up distinguishes its revenue sources between the four product ranges is
interesting because it gives some indication of how revenues and profits are broken down for
internal management purposes. Sales of trays grew significantly in 2026 by (57.4/35.5) 61.6%,
forming 21.8% of Pack-Up’s sales in 2026 compared to only 15.3% in 2025.

We must be careful not to extrapolate from this data without other data to back up such
calculations. This data is very limited, covering only a change for one company from one year
to the next. We don’t know why such a large increase occurred – it may have been to do with
something specific that Pack-Up did rather than because of an upturn in the market. There is
no guarantee that the sales of trays will continue to grow at such a rate, either for Pack-Up or
for anyone else selling trays.

We must therefore be prudent when making predictions based on analysis of this report. We
should review the data in conjunction with Pack-Up’s marketing activity and with overall
market statistics.

The figures for gross profit are less valuable because it is not necessarily clear to Cartn how
Pack-Up breaks down its cost of sales between product ranges. Pack-Up may have a different
proportion of fixed costs to Cartn, meaning that direct comparisons at different sales volumes
would not be feasible. This makes it difficult for Cartn to predict the costs that it will incur in
developing and selling semi-rigid trays. The figure for gross profit may also exclude product
development costs written off that Pack-Up had to incur that have yet to be borne by Cartn.



4                                                                         K A P LA N P UB L I S H I N G
                                                                   MO CK E XAM B - ANSWERS

The limited analysis does not include any information relating to the net profit per product
line. Expenses incurred in arriving at net profit per product line would be of particular interest
as it would help to identify specific marketing and promotion costs incurred.

The choice of accounting policies and accounting treatments adopted by Pack-Up may also be
a relevant factor. For example, the depreciation method and rate applied by Pack-Up for non-
current assets may be different to Cartn, resulting in a different charge to profit or loss. The
allocation of this charge between expense headings such as cost of sales, distribution costs
and administrative expenses will also impact the information under review. The allocation of
common costs between the four product lines will also change the perspective and insight
available into Pack-Up’s operations.

Pack-Up’s analysis implies something about the potential demand for trays, but using the
analysis requires several significant assumptions that could prove to be invalid. For example,
has Pack-Up’s revenue growth come from taking market share from competitors, or is the
market itself growing sharply? It is possible that this is a smaller market than we may have
anticipated based on Pack-Up’s sales growth and that the launch of Cartn’s products will
simply lead to operating losses by both Pack-Up and Cartn.

Financial Manager



MARKING GUIDE:




Sub-task (a) = 60% (15 marks)
 Trait
 Predicting         Level       Descriptor                                                           Marks
 costs and
                                No rewardable material.                                                0
 revenues
                    Level 1     Offers some discussion of challenges relating to predicting           1-5
                                costs and revenues for Cartn in the new market. Discussion is
                                generic with little relation to the specific scenario.
                    Level 2     Offers good discussion of challenges relating to predicting          6-10
                                costs and revenues for Cartn in the new market. Makes good
                                attempt to relate the discussion to the specific scenario.
                    Level 3     Offers full discussion of challenges relating to predicting costs    11-15
                                and revenues for Cartn in the new market. The discussion is
                                entirely based around the specific scenario.




K APLAN P UBLI S H I N G                                                                        5
CIMA MANAGE MENT LEVEL CASE ST UDY (MAY AND AUGUST 2026 )

Sub-task (b) = 40% (10 marks)
    Trait
    Usefulness of   Level     Descriptor                                                             Marks
    divisional
                              No rewardable material.                                                   0
    analysis
    information     Level 1   Describes rules relating to analysis and identifies problems             1-3
                              Cartn will incur associated with determining divisional
                              profitability.
                    Level 2   Describes usefulness of reported breakdown of figures and                4-6
                              discusses problems Cartn will incur associated with determining
                              divisional profitability.
                    Level 3   Evaluates usefulness of reported breakdown of figures and               7-10
                              evaluates problems Cartn will incur associated with determining
                              divisional profitability, including predictive value.




6                                                                    K A P LA N P UB L I S H I N G
                                                                  MO CK E XAM B - ANSWERS

Task 2

To: Elizabeth Maenda
From: Financial Manager
Date: Today
Subject: Cartn trays

Product development team engagement

Team engagement is characterised by the level of enthusiasm and dedication of team
members. At present, Product Development team staff tasked to work on the project to
develop the range of semi-rigid trays have been reluctant to focus on it. By implementing the
following strategies, Cartn can improve the team’s engagement, helping contribute to the
successful development of the new range.

Project management and accountability

Project management will assist in the integration of all aspects of the project, ensuring that
the proper knowledge and resources are available when and where needed, and that the
expected outcome is produced in a timely, cost-effective manner. A dedicated project
manager should oversee the tray product development, ensuring accountability and
coordination across a range of multi-disciplinary departments. This is particularly important
given the team's current struggle to obtain the necessary cooperation and expertise from the
Production department. This oversight will help engage the Product Development team to
work towards the achievement of the project objectives.

Alignment and understanding of project goals

The development of the range of semi-rigid trays is the first major change for some time in
the products we offer. It is important that the project goals and targets are clearly
communicated to the Product Development team so that they understand what Cartn is
striving to achieve, such as successfully entering the attractive Harrland market.

Individual and team goals and targets, aligned to the overall project goals, should be identified
and communicated to the team so that team members understand what their role is and what
is expected of them, including clear deadlines.

Collaborative tools should be used to share project plans, and regular cross-departmental
meetings should take place to ensure alignment and understanding of project goals,
particularly to bridge the gap with Production.

Incentivise engagement

The Product Development team is more likely to engage in the project if they understand how
its success will benefit them. A successful project capturing growth in the tray market could
help contribute to Cartn’s improved financial performance. This may, in turn, benefit the
Product Development team, for example, through improved job security, pay increases or the
introduction of incentives such as performance-related bonuses. The team has been with the


K APLAN P UBLI S H I N G                                                                       7
CIMA MANAGE MENT LEVEL CASE ST UDY (MAY AND AUGUST 2026 )

company for many years developing cartons and tubs. They may find this work enjoyable and
consider that it adds value and so could be reluctant to change their focus. However, the new
project will be a personal development opportunity for team members to learn about tray
design and production. A recognition programme could be introduced offering career growth
opportunities for high performing staff.

Resource allocation and support

Poor team engagement may, in part, be due to a perception by members that they do not
have the time, expertise or support required to successfully assist in developing the new
range. An expectation should be defined of how much time team members are expected to
commit to the achievement of the project goals, and when that time is likely to be required.

Cartn should organise training sessions to enhance the technical knowledge of the Product
Development team regarding specific challenges and opportunities relating to tray design and
manufacture. This should help the team to consider how best they are able to add value when
identifying and solving problems associated with manufacturing the trays, such as adapting
the moulding patterns dependent on customer needs.

Cartn should also facilitate knowledge exchange sessions where Production team members
share insights on manufacturing processes relevant to trays. This should assist the Product
Development team to feel more supported by Production.

Cultural and change management

This is the first major change for some time in the products offered and will require a shift in
mindset for the Product Development team. Although it is thought that the team possesses
the technical expertise to source suitable materials and produce high-quality trays, their
apparent lack of interest suggests a reluctance or fear of change. Cartn should address
resistance to change by fostering a culture of innovation and adaptability. It should encourage
open discussions about concerns and promote a shared vision for the new product range.

In addition, it could provide change management support to help team members transition
from their long-standing focus on cartons and tubs to the new semi-rigid tray range.

Transfer price

The Product Development team may be making excessive use of Production staff time in order
to free Product Development staff for other duties, while the Production Manager is
encouraging Production staff to ignore such requests.

Such behaviour is potentially damaging to the overall business, but both sets of actions are
designed to benefit the individual teams under each department head. It may be difficult
therefore to convince either department head to change their behaviour. Simply instructing
the two department heads to cooperate or imposing a transfer price that they feel is unfair
may lead to resentment, resistance and further problems of dysfunctional behaviour.

The Production Department may not be able to achieve their productivity or cost targets if the
team is spending excessive time assisting the Product Development department without any



8                                                                       K A P LA N P UB L I S H I N G
                                                                 MO CK E XAM B - ANSWERS

financial reward. Perhaps overtime is being incurred because of the extra work, or productivity
levels are reduced.

It would be ideal if the question of cooperation could be resolved by an appropriate transfer
price, so that neither department has an incentive to behave in a dysfunctional manner, but
both department heads still feel that they are in control of their area of operational
responsibility.

Generally, charging transfer prices based on opportunity costs offers the most satisfactory
way of optimising internal trading. Opportunity costs, however, may be difficult to measure
in this case. The difficulty is that there will not be an objective, mutually agreeable, way to
measure the value of the time being recharged that is acceptable to both departments.

One response to the problem might be to permit the Production Manager to make an internal
charge that is equal to the hourly overtime rate paid to staff. If necessary, the Production
department could then afford to pay overtime to staff to make up for time spent dealing with
Product Development department queries. The charge should have an upper limit that was
less than the hourly rate that would have to be paid for external consultants. This should
discourage the Product Development department from using external providers, which would
lead to additional cost incurred by the Group. The imposition of charges above those currently
permitted would create a disincentive for Product Development to make excessive use of
Production staff time.

An alternative approach would be to use dual pricing. Cartn’s Board is committed to launching
trays as a product, so the development work is essential. To keep both teams happy and allow
development to proceed without friction, we could allow the Production team to set market
rates for the transfer, with the Product Development team only being charged a marginal cost.
This would keep both managers happy. The finance team would have to reconcile and adjust
for the differences.



Financial Manager




K APLAN P UBLI S H I N G                                                                     9
CIMA MANAGE MENT LEVEL CASE ST UDY (MAY AND AUGUST 2026 )

MARKING GUIDE:



Sub-task (a) = 60% (15 marks)
 Trait
 Product           Level        Descriptor                                                               Marks
 Development
                                No rewardable material.                                                     0
 team
 engagement        Level 1      Defines engagement and identifies need for engagement of the               1-5
                                Product Development team.
                   Level 2      Defines engagement and offers some relevant suggestions for               6-10
                                Product Development team engagement, with good
                                justification.
                   Level 3      Defines engagement and offers a good range of suggestions for             11-15
                                Product Development team engagement, with full justification.



Sub-task (b) = 40% (10 marks)
 Trait
 Transfer price    Level        Descriptor                                                               Marks
                                No rewardable material.                                                     0
                   Level 1      Identifies transfer pricing approach for Cartn and offers some             1-3
                                justification for the recommendation made.
                   Level 2      Discusses transfer pricing in the context of this Cartn scenario           4-6
                                and offers good justification for the recommendation made.
                   Level 3      Provides a good discussion of the dysfunctional behaviour that            7-10
                                could arise from this Cartn scenario and offers full justification
                                for the recommendation made.




10                                                                       K A P LA N P UB L I S H I N G
                                                                 MO CK E XAM B - ANSWERS

Task 3

To: Elizabeth Maenda
From: Financial Manager
Subject: Cartn trays

Hi Elizabeth,

Debt and equity

The immediate costs of raising finance will always be an issue in selecting between different
sources available to Cartn. There is generally a significant fixed cost associated with raising
equity, which makes it uneconomic to raise small amounts by equity rather than debt. As a
quoted company, Cartn could make a public issue of shares on the Harrlandian Stock
Exchange. The financing of the new plant and equipment plus additional inventory will require
an investment of H$45m which, if financed by equity, would represent an increase of 11.6%
(H$45/H$386.4m). This would double the current issued share capital plus share premium, so
represents a significant proportionate increase. It may also have implications for the current
controlling shareholders as they may not be able to invest sufficient to retain that interest.
That said, it would reduce the current gearing ratio from 28.5% (H$154.3m/(H$386.4m +
H$154.3m)) to 26.3% (H$154.3m/(H$431.4m + H$154.3m)), which providers of equity finance
may view as a reduction in financial risk and a beneficial change.

Gearing is an important accounting ratio and so the impact of new funding should be
considered. Cartn could make an issue of corporate bonds or notes on the Harrlandian Stock
Exchange to raise the necessary finance. Alternatively, it may be able to source debt finance
or grants from a specialist provider of finance, such as agencies promoting more sustainable
manufacturing and working practices.

Cartn’s gearing is presently 28.5%. If debt finance is used, borrowing a further H$45m would
increase the gearing ratio to 34.0% (H$199.3m/(H$386.4m + H$199.3m)). The funding to be
raised in comparison to current debt levels represents an increase of approximately 29%. The
increase in gearing from using debt finance may cause some concern amongst current
shareholders who may seek a higher rate of return on their investment in Cartn. Debt is a
cheaper source of finance than equity due to the lower risk levels perceived by debt investors,
so the combined effect of higher gearing and cheaper finance may be to reduce the company’s
WACC. They may need to be reassured of the potential commercial and financial benefits that
the investment would generate.

The return paid to providers of debt capital will be a tax-deductible expense in the statement
of profit or loss, making it even cheaper. The return to equity holders would be a reduction in
retained earnings within equity and not tax-deductible.

It would be possible to tailor debt to match the life of the assets that are to be financed. In
this case, there will be a significant investment in new plant and equipment for production
plus increased inventory holdings. The intention would be to develop a new product range



K APLAN P UBLI S H I N G                                                                    11
CIMA MANAGE MENT LEVEL CASE ST UDY (MAY AND AUGUST 2026 )

using new assets which would be subject to the same regular repair and maintenance
programme of our current plant and equipment. It is expected that, on a long-term basis, once
this has been funded and subsequently paid, the only ongoing investment requirement would
be the financing of additional inventory holdings. Revenue from the new product range will
be used to help replace these assets, potentially removing the need for additional debt.

Integrated Reporting Capitals

Financial capital is the funding that will appear in the Cartn Group’s statement of financial
position that would be reported as a matter of routine in the annual financial statements. The
funding raised for the planned expansion will simply be reported as normal in equity and/or
non-current liabilities as applicable. Finance costs associated with debt finance will be
included in the statement of profit or loss, and any dividends paid to equity holders would be
disclosed in the statement of changes in equity.

Manufactured capital will essentially be the investment in the property, plant and equipment
that appears in the Group statement of financial position. Again, it will simply be reflected as
an increase in non-current assets in the financial statements.

Intellectual capital will reflect any intangibles that Cartn creates because of the new range of
trays. It will not be necessary to attach a monetary value to those assets; it will be adequate
to describe them in sufficient detail to inform stakeholders about the intellectual property
that Cartn has created.

In this case, the knowledge relates to the design and creation of new trays. Also, the materials
used in the manufacture of the trays may have particular qualities, such as their size, shape or
biodegradable qualities that enhance business customer and end consumer satisfaction. It is
sufficient that Cartn has developed designs and processes that enable it to expand the range
of products that it sells.

Note, however, that Cartn does have intangible assets which may include patented processes,
materials or components which may be able to be used for the trays or easily adapted for use
for this new range. It is also possible that Cartn may develop a new production process for the
new range, in which case, the requirements of IAS 38 Intangible assets, should be complied
with, capitalising any costs that meet the required criteria, and writing-off any other costs
incurred.

Human capital will reflect any new competencies or capabilities that will be created or
enhanced for any of Cartn’s staff. The new range will require Cartn’s design staff to develop
new skills relating to developing the designs for the new trays, perhaps in relation to the shape
or dimensions of the trays. Those skills may be of value when extending the Cartn product
range. Human capital may be enhanced by recruitment of employees with different skills or
competencies or providing additional training for members of the current workforce.

Social and relationship capital arises from relationships and the ability to create collective
wellbeing. Cartn will create a new product range which will offer business customers a product
with enhanced sustainability credentials and give end consumers greater choice to enable




12                                                                       K A P LA N P UB L I S H I N G
                                                                  MO CK E XAM B - ANSWERS

their needs to be more easily or better matched. The new range could be regarded as a
preferable alternative to similar products offered by other suppliers.

Natural capital reflects the impact that Cartn has on scarce resources. Cartn should design its
processes and products to minimise waste and focus upon recyclability of its materials and
packaging. Given the increased awareness of investors and society to environmental-related
issues, any investment in new plant and equipment that is more energy-efficient and that
contributes to waste reduction from the production process will be viewed positively by
interested parties. The use of wheat straw, which may otherwise go to waste, in tray
production may be disclosed as an environmentally beneficial use of natural capital.

If you need any further information, please contact me.

Financial Manager



MARKING GUIDE:


Sub-task (a) = 40% (10 marks)
 Trait
 Debt and           Level       Descriptor                                                          Marks
 equity
                                No rewardable material.                                               0
                    Level 1     Explains a limited number of points in basic or general terms        1-3
                                relating to how finance is raised is accounted for without detail
                                or application to the context of the scenario.
                    Level 2     Explains a reasonable number of points that demonstrates             4-7
                                some insight and understanding of how finance raised is
                                classified and accounted for. There may be limited application
                                to the context of the pre-seen and/or scenario.
                    Level 3     Fully explains a broad range of points that demonstrate insight     8-10
                                and understanding of how finance raised is classified and
                                accounted for in the financial statements.
                                There should be application to the context of the pre-seen
                                and/or scenario e.g. reference to equity and debt finance in
                                the statement of financial position.




K APLAN P UBLI S H I N G                                                                     13
CIMA MANAGE MENT LEVEL CASE ST UDY (MAY AND AUGUST 2026 )

Sub-task (b) = 60% (15 marks)
 Trait
 Integrated       Level     Descriptor                                                              Marks
 reporting
                            No rewardable material.                                                    0
                  Level 1   Explains some points that demonstrate an understanding of                 1-4
                            integrated reporting, but is not comprehensive, lacks detail
                            and with minimal application to Cartn.
                  Level 2   Explains a range of points that demonstrate insight and                  5-10
                            understanding of integrated reporting, but is not
                            comprehensive. For example, it may lack comment on the
                            impact on the different forms of capital. Good application to
                            Cartn.
                  Level 3   Fully explains a broad range of points that demonstrate insight          11-15
                            and understanding of what an integrated report is, how it
                            differs from financial statements and includes reference
                            and/or full application to Cartn.




14                                                                  K A P LA N P UB L I S H I N G
                                                                  MO CK E XAM B - ANSWERS

Task 4

To: Elizabeth Maenda
From: Financial Manager
Date: Today
Subject: Project issues for tray production

Project management

The Board’s decision on whether to focus solely on consumer-friendly trays with reduced
secondary packaging, or to develop two separate ranges to appeal to both consumers and
food producers, will significantly impact how we manage this project.

Defining project scope

Currently, the Board is weighing the marketing benefits of a dual product approach against
operational concerns regarding factory space and production inefficiencies. Making a
definitive choice soon will provide the project team with a clear objective. A single product
focus creates a unified goal, allowing the departments to align and collaborate productively.
A dual product approach creates a much broader, fragmented scope, requiring the project
manager to carefully balance competing departmental priorities from the outset.

Resource allocation and team composition

If the Board opts to produce two types of products simultaneously, the project's scope and
complexity will effectively double. This will put significant pressure on the Product
Development and Operations teams, requiring careful resource management. The project
manager will need to assemble a team with the right mix of practical skills to organise complex
production scheduling and maintain strict quality control across two distinct lines, ensuring
this dual workload is handled efficiently and within budget.

In contrast, if there is a focus on a single market, the team can concentrate its resources. For
example, focusing solely on consumers means the team must solve specific technical
challenges, such as printing directly onto the tray material to eliminate secondary packaging.
This narrower scope would require a project team heavily weighted with technical design
specialists and external print suppliers.

Project leadership and liaison with stakeholder groups

The chosen path will also dictate the project manager’s core focus and stakeholder
interactions.

If the decision is to focus on a single consumer-led design, Marketing may be best positioned
to lead the project. They would need to use persuasive communication to convince our food
manufacturing customers to adopt our new packaging, despite their initial reluctance and the
potential for increased primary packaging prices.

Should the Board decide to produce two distinct product types, managing simultaneous
product lines will require a project manager with exceptional organisational and negotiation


K APLAN P UBLI S H I N G                                                                     15
CIMA MANAGE MENT LEVEL CASE ST UDY (MAY AND AUGUST 2026 )

skills. They must balance the commercial ambitions of Marketing with the practical constraints
of Operations, ensuring that the drive to capture both markets does not severely compromise
our factory space, costs, or overall production efficiency.

Pricing approach

If Cartn decides to prioritise the preferences of food consumers for tray production, it will still
have to consider that consumers are not purchasing directly from Cartn and so our pricing will
still need to appeal to the food manufacturers.

Penetration pricing

If we decide to focus on consumers, we will be aiming to reduce the level of secondary
packaging required for the trays. We know that this is an approach that food producers may
not find attractive, so to encourage them to choose Cartn trays, we may choose to price as
low as possible. Penetration pricing involves setting a low price initially to attract large sales
volumes quickly. Once established in the market, the prices could then be slowly raised to a
level that will generate appropriate profits in the longer term.

If through low pricing we are able to encourage food manufacturers to redesign their products
with minimal secondary packaging while maintaining their profitability and potentially
stimulating their own sales to environmentally conscious consumers, sales volumes should
grow over time. This would lead to achieving the benefits of economies of scale that make
penetration pricing a profitable approach over the long term, despite the low profit margins
earned initially.

However, the main danger of penetration pricing is that the prices we could achieve would
not be enough to generate an appropriate level of profit. Only if the strategy is successful
could we raise prices at a later date and/or gain the benefits of economies of scale. This is a
risky approach given the level of investment made in the products to date.

Price skimming

For products that are attractive in ways other than price, such as unique or high-quality
products, an approach that could be taken is to charge high prices initially to earn as much
profit per unit as possible from those customers who are willing to pay such prices to have the
product. The prices can then be lowered gradually to tap into the rest of the market.

This would enable high profit margins to be achieved initially, which would help to recoup the
costs incurred when developing the trays.

Environmentally conscious customers may be willing to pay higher prices for the products that
meet their desire for sustainability. However, there will also be an element of the market that
desires such products but cannot afford to pay higher prices. Our usual food manufacturing
customers will not wish to raise prices for these consumers as they will probably lose sales as
a result. There is the possibility that the manufacturers will pay the higher prices to Cartn but
not pass the additional cost onto consumers, but we should not rely on this happening when
making our pricing decision.



16                                                                        K A P LA N P UB L I S H I N G
                                                                 MO CK E XAM B - ANSWERS

It may be that we could target customers who produce food products at the premium end of
the market. Their customer base may already be those who are willing and able to pay higher
prices for sustainable products. This would, however, leave us targeting a niche aspect of the
market rather than the market as a whole.

Consistency for the brand

Ultimately, we should set a price that is consistent with our product positioning. We don’t
want our product range and pricing to be seen as confusing to food manufacturers. We should
decide who we are ultimately targeting and price in line with the expectations of that market.

Product and product reputation risks

Product risks

One risk that might arise from this new product is that we target the incorrect market. The
market that aligns with the wishes of environmentally conscious food consumers may not fully
materialise. It may be that the government debate proceeds no further than a short
discussion. No legislative changes may result, even if the government agrees that progress on
reducing secondary packaging is a positive step.

Without legislative changes, food producers may not wish to incur the cost of amending their
own production processes until sales of the (potentially more expensive) food contained in
the updated packaging is guaranteed, or until customers are seen to switch away from
products with higher levels of secondary packaging.

If we target food manufacturers who do not wish to make changes to their product packaging,
we may end up falling foul of legislative changes if they do arise.

If we were to decide to produce both types of packaging, we may incur excessive cost to run
two types of production line, such that the profitability of our tray production doesn’t meet
targets and is considered a failure.

Product reputation risks

If we fail to meet the wishes of consumers, negative publicity could arise, via such outlets as
social media. In theory, this could have a significant negative impact on sales of all of our
products.

However, we are shielded from this to a large extent, as we are not the ‘face of the product’
– the food manufacturers themselves are. It is they who are likely to bear the reputational
damage from failing to act in a more sustainable manner.

However, it would not take much effort for determined consumers or media outlets to
discover that we are actually responsible for manufacturing the materials that they are
unhappy with, so it is a risk we should consider.

If we fail to meet the wishes of food manufacturers, our reputation within the industry could
be damaged. This could have a knock-on effect to sales of our cartons and tubs to current
customers.


K APLAN P UBLI S H I N G                                                                    17
CIMA MANAGE MENT LEVEL CASE ST UDY (MAY AND AUGUST 2026 )

We may also fail to attract new customers if it is felt that we prioritise our view of consumer
needs over our direct customers’ actual needs.

Financial Manager

MARKING GUIDE:

Sub-task (a) = 33% (8 marks)
 Trait
 Project            Level      Descriptor                                                               Marks
 management
                               No rewardable material.                                                     0
                    Level 1    Identifies some ways the Board's decision will affect project              1-2
                               management, but the explanation is basic and lacks specific
                               application to the Cartn scenario.
                    Level 2    Good discussion of how the decision to focus on consumers, or              3-5
                               both consumers and manufacturers will affect the management
                               of the project, with some application to the Cartn scenario.
                    Level 3    Offers full discussion of how the Board's decision will impact             6-8
                               various aspects of project management with full application to
                               the specific Cartn scenario.



Sub-task (b) = 34% (9 marks)
 Trait
 Pricing            Level      Descriptor                                                               Marks
                               No rewardable material.                                                     0
                    Level 1    Describes pricing strategies, but with little reference to the Cartn       1-3
                               scenario and overall pricing strategy.
                    Level 2    Offers sensible recommendations for pricing trays, with some               3-6
                               justification and some relevance to Cartn’s current pricing
                               strategy.
                    Level 3    Offers sensible recommendations for pricing trays, with good               7-9
                               justification and relevance to the product and the overall Cartn
                               pricing strategy.




18                                                                      K A P LA N P UB L I S H I N G
                                                                  MO CK E XAM B - ANSWERS

Sub-task (c) = 33% (8 marks)
 Trait
 Risks              Level       Descriptor                                                           Marks
                                No rewardable material.                                                 0
                    Level 1     Defines product and product reputation risks but with little           1-2
                                relation to Cartn and the specific product range.
                    Level 2     Offers a good discussion of the product and product reputation         3-5
                                risks arising in the specific scenario.

                    Level 3     Offers a full discussion of the product and product reputation         6-8
                                risks arising in the specific scenario, with good justification of
                                their selection.




SUMMARY MARKING GUIDE

                                     CORE ACTIVITY
                   A            B            C          D           E       TOTAL
  TASK 1           15                                  10                      25
  TASK 2                                     15                    10          25
  TASK 3                        10                                 15          25
  TASK 4                        9            8          8                      25
  TOTAL            15           19           23        18          25         100

  Blueprint     15 - 25       15 – 25    15 – 25     15 – 25     15 - 25




K APLAN P UBLI S H I N G                                                                     19
CIMA MANAGE MENT LEVEL CASE ST UDY (MAY AND AUGUST 2026 )




20                                                   K A P LA N P UB L I S H I N G
